What JSON Schema?
JSON Schema is a vocabulary that allows you to annotate and validate JSON documents. It describes your existing data format with clear, human- and machine-readable documentation for complete structural validation, useful for automated testing and validating client-submitted data.
In simpler terms, JSON Schema is a contract for your JSON document that defines the expected data types and format of each field in the response. For example, you can create a schema that says your API's /users endpoint returns a top-level array of objects (eg, users). Naturally, you can recurse into each user and describe the format of its fields as well.
There are many tools and libraries available to create and work with JSON Schemas, making getting started easy. In this post, I'll walk-through an example of using Assertible to create a test that validates an API response against a JSON Schema. From there, automated monitoring and alerts can be set up for continuous testing.
It's worth investigating other tools available, especially libraries in your programming language of choice. JSON Schema is a robust tool that has many application useful for all sorts of validation and documentation.

Basic JSON Schema example 
{
        "firstName": "John",
        "lastName": "Doe",
        "age": 35
}

JSON Schema assertions in Assertible
There are many tools and libraries available to test API responses against a JSON Schema. Assertible has an easy to use JSON Schema assertion to validate an API response that we'll set up in this example.
If you haven't gotten started with Assertible yet, you can create a free account and enter your API's URL to get started. For more help on this, check out the quick start guide.
Verifying an API response against a JSON Schema in Assertible is only a couple of steps. Let's walk through it:
First, create a test that calls the API endpoint you want to check
On the test's page, navigate to the Assertions tab, select Add new assertion, and choose the JSON Validation assertion. 

Automation and alerts
With Assertible, it's easy to put this test on a schedule for automated testing and set up failure alerts.
On the Assertible free plan, you can set up an hourly test schedule, and on one of the upgraded plans, you can set up 1 minute, 5 minute, and 15 minute schedules to make sure your API is continuously tested.
All alert and notification functionality is available on Assertible's free plan. You can send failure messages to your email with hooks or to a team chat using the Slack integration.



